---
layout: post
title: Week 1 Notes
---

Notes and highlights from the meeting.

## Before our meeting

* This is our first meeting, so no preparation is required.

## Digits of perfect squares

Lots of great mathematics can come from asking very basic questions.
Today, we will look at one such example, as we explore the following, childish-sounding line of thought.

Recall that a **perfect square** is a positive integer, whose square root is also an integer.

**Question:** What can the last few digits of a perfect square be?

On the surface, this looks kind of simple.
You might be tempted to say, well they can be anything!
But we will immediately realize this is not the case, if we explore what the last digit ends up being.

**Problem:** Determine what the last digit a perfect square can be.

**Solution:**

If the last digit of $$n$$ is $$a$$, then the last digit of $$n^2$$ is the same as the last digit of $$a^2$$.
Thus we only need to consider the squares of single-digit integers.

|$$a$$| last digit of $$a^2$$ |
| --- | --------------------- |
| 0 |  0 |
| 1 |  1 | 
| 2 |  4 | 
| 3 |  9 | 
| 4 |  6 | 
| 5 |  5 | 
| 6 |  6 | 
| 7 |  9 |
| 8 |  4 | 
| 9 |  1 |

We see that the last digit can only be $$1, 4, 5, 6,$$ or $$9$$.
:black_square_button:

More generally, we could ask ourselves about what the last *two* digits of a perfect square can be.

**Problem:** Determine what the last digit a perfect square can be.

**Solution:**

If the last two digits of $$n$$ are $$b$$ and $$a$$, so that $$n = \dots ba$$, then the last two digits of $$n^2$$ are the same as the last two digits of $$(ba)^2$$.
To figure out the possibilities, we can make a table of values whose rows represent the value of $$a$$ and whose columns indicate the value of $$b$$, the entries of which are the last two digits.

|       | b=0 | b=1 | b=2 | b=3 | b=4 | b=5 | b=6 | b=7 | b=8 | b=9 |
| ----- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **a=0** | 00 | 00 | 00 | 00 | 00 | 00 | 00 | 00 | 00 | 00 |
| **a=1** | 01 | 21 | 41 | 61 | 81 | 01 | 21 | 41 | 61 | 81 |
| **a=2** | 04 | 44 | 84 | 24 | 64 | 04 | 44 | 84 | 24 | 64 |
| **a=3** | 09 | 69 | 29 | 89 | 49 | 09 | 69 | 29 | 89 | 49 |
| **a=4** | 16 | 96 | 76 | 56 | 36 | 16 | 96 | 76 | 56 | 36 |
| **a=5** | 25 | 25 | 25 | 25 | 25 | 25 | 25 | 25 | 25 | 25 |
| **a=6** | 36 | 56 | 76 | 96 | 16 | 36 | 56 | 76 | 96 | 16 |
| **a=7** | 49 | 89 | 29 | 69 | 09 | 49 | 89 | 29 | 69 | 09 |
| **a=8** | 64 | 24 | 84 | 44 | 04 | 64 | 24 | 84 | 44 | 04 |
| **a=9** | 81 | 61 | 41 | 21 | 01 | 81 | 61 | 41 | 21 | 01 |

In particular, the only options are the twenty-two values

$$00,01,04,09,16,21,24,25,29,36,41,44,49,56,61,64,69,76,81,84,89,\ \text{and}\ 96.$$

:black_square_button:


From the table above, we can start to see all kinds of interesting patterns, that we can try to prove.
For example, we see that $$25$$ repeats in the $$a=5$$ row, and we can try to prove why this is.

**Problem:** Show that $$n$$ ends in $$5$$ if and only if $$n^2$$ ends in $$25$$.

**Solution:** 

Let the last two digits of $$n$$ be $$ba$$.
If $$n^2$$ ends in $$25$$, then the last digit of $$a^2$$ is $$5$$.
However, from our table of values above, the only way that this is possible is if $$a=5$$.

Conversely, if $$n$$ ends in $$5$$, then $$a=5$$ and the last two digits of $$n^2$$ are the last two digits of $$(5 + 10\cdot b)^2 = 25 + 100(b + b^2)$$, which is $$25$$.
:black_square_button:

Likewise, one might notice that the columns all repeat again starting with the $$b=5$$ column.

**Problem:** Let $$0\leq b < 5$$ and $$b' = b +5$$.  Show that the last two digits of the square of a number ending with $$ba$$ are the same as the square of a number ending nin $$b'a$$.

**Solution:**

The last two digits of a number ending in $$ba$$ will be the same as the last two digits of $$(a + 10\cdot b)^2 = a^2 + 20a\cdot b + 100\cdot b^2$$, which in turn will be the same as the last two digits of $$a^2 + 20a\cdot b$$, since the multiple of $$100$$ won't change the last two digits.
Likewise, the last two digits of a number ending in $$b'a$$ will be the same as the last two digits of $$a^2 + 20a\cdot b' = a^2 + 20a(b + 5) = a^2 = 20a\cdot b + 100a$$.  The multiple of $$100$$ will have no effect on the last two digits, so this proves our claim.
:black_square_button:

## Repeating last digits

One interesting observation that we can make from the table above is that the only possible case when the last two digits of a perfect square are the same are when those digits are $$00$$ or $$44$$.

In particular, this means that we know right away that a crazy number like $$349345242099$$ is not a perfect square, without even doing anything.

However, why we only get repeating $$0$$'s and $$4$$'s is a deeper question.  Answering it leads to some rather interesting, and difficult, problems.

**Problem:** Prove, without using the big table above, that if the last two digits of $$n^2$$ are the same, then $$n^2$$ must end in either $$00$$ or $$44$$.

**Solution:**

Suppose that $$n = \dots ba$$ and that the last two digits of $$n^2$$ are the same.
Let $$y$$ and $$x$$ be the first and last digit of $$a^2$$, respectively.
Then the last digit of $$n^2$$ is $$x$$ and the second-to-last digit is the last digit of $$y + 2xb$$.
Thus the last digit of $$y + 2xb$$ must be $$x$$.
It follows that $$x$$ and $$y$$ are either both even or both odd.

Now if $$a$$ is odd, then $$x$$ is odd and $$y$$ is even, which is a contradiction.
Likewise, if $$a = 4$$ or $$a = 6$$, then $$x$$ is even and $$y$$ is odd, which is also a contradiction.
Hence $$a$$ is $$0$$, $$2$$, or $$8$$, making $$x$$ either $$0$$ or $$4$$.
:black_square_button:

**Problem (Putnam 1970, A3):** A perfect square has length n if its last n digits (in base 10) are the same and non-zero. What is the longest possible length? What is the smallest square achieving this length?

**Hints:**

* As we have seen above, the only repeating non-zero digits we can get are fours.  So we just need to figure out how many fours we can get.
* We can get at least two fours from $$12^2$$, so the longest possible length is at least $$2$$.
* In fact, it's not too troublesome to come up with a length three example by hand!  Can you do it?
* Now show that you cannot get a length $$4$$ example. 


There is also the following problem published in the January 2023 issue of the American Mathematical Monthly.
If you can solve it and write and submit your solution by **May 31, 2023**, you will get your name published in the Monthly!

**Problem (Amer. Math Monthly, \#12368):** For every integer $$n\geq 4$$, how many perfect squares have $$n$$ digits ending in $$444$$?


